---
title: ST2132 Review
---

Taken in AY20/21 Sem 2 under Prof Lim Tiong Wee.  All classes were conducted online due to the pandemic.

This module builds on ST2131 and covers a bunch of common distributions, method of moments, method of maximum likelihood, efficiency, sufficiency, hypothesis testing, and general likelihood ratio tests.

Graded components:
- Tutorials and assignments (40%)
- Final exam (60%)

Students are to form groups of four for tutorial sessions, and are strongly encouraged to form their own groups with friends.  Each group is required to solve the tutorial questions together and submit them at the end of the session.  These submissions are graded.

There are also four graded take-home individual written assignments.

There is no midterm for this module.

The final exam was designed in a way that a graphing calculator was not required.  This meant that answers are often in terms of some unknown.  Some questions were set creatively and required students to fully understand the underlying principles.

Lectures are taught in an unusual style — students are expected to read the lecture notes beforehand, and the lecture session is used to go through lecture problems (these problems are part of the lecture notes, but the lecture notes do not contain the solutions to them).  As such, lectures generally finish early or on time, and the pace is very manageable (assuming that you have at least skimmed through the lecture notes).

Prof Lim is careful to ensure that all students can follow his explanations, and is happy to explain in greater detail when students have doubts about the lecture content.  Tutorials were initially problem-solving sessions; but midway through the semester the tutor started presenting complete solutions to the tutorial questions, which made the tutorials become copying sessions.
